Adding a blog post for GCB 2024 conference (#2799)
galaxyproject/galaxy-hub: content/news/2024-10-31-GCB2024/index.md

---
title: "Engaging, Learning, and Sharing at the German Conference of Bioinformatics 2024 with the Galaxy Team!"
tease: "A recap of our Galaxy team's experience at GCB 2024, featuring insightful talks, interactive poster sessions, hands-on workshops, and memorable social events!"
date: '2024-10-30'
authors: Engy Nasr
subsites: [all-eu, global, us]
tags: [GCB-2024, Bielefeld]
main_subsite: eu
---

> The [German Conference of Bioinformatics (GCB) 2024](https://gcb2024.de/) took place in Bielefeld from September 30 to October 2, bringing together leading minds in bioinformatics to discuss the latest advancements in computational biology, microbiome research, genomics, and more. Representing the Galaxy community, Engy Nasr and Momin Saim attended, contributing with two poster presentations and participating in workshops, poster sessions, and stimulating talks. Here’s a recap of our experience and the conference highlights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [German Conference of Bioinformatics (GCB) 2024](https://gcb2024.de/) took place in Bielefeld from September 30 to October 2, bringing together leading minds in bioinformatics to discuss the latest advancements in computational biology, microbiome research, genomics, and more. Representing the Galaxy community, Engy Nasr and Saim Momin attended, contributing with two poster presentations and participating in workshops, poster sessions, and stimulating talks. Here’s a recap of our experience and the conference highlights.
```

![Placeholder for GCB2024 Logo](gcb2024logo.png)

### Day 1: Hands-on Workshops

Our GCB 2024 journey began with two in-depth workshops, where we gained valuable insights and skills in specialized areas of bioinformatics. With seven workshops running in parallel, we joined the following two sessions:

1. **Computational Pangenomics Workshop:** This workshop covered pangenomics fundamentals, with applications in analyzing genetic diversity across species. We explored advanced computational tools for building and analyzing pangenomic datasets, including *PanBench*, *PanGrowth*, *Plast*, *Bifrost*, and *SANS*. The hands-on exercises illuminated new ways we could use pangenomic analysis within the Galaxy framework.

> 2. **Bioinformatic Metagenome and Metaproteome Analysis for Microbiome Insights:** Led by leading microbiome researchers, this session provided tools and workflows for understanding metagenomic and metaproteomic data. We learned methods for assessing microbial communities, a crucial area in Galaxy’s microbial data analysis tools. 

Reviewer: Maybe you wanted to mention this instead : [Standardizing and harmonizing NGS analysis workflows](https://gcb2024.de/Workshops.html#WS7)

### Keynotes, Conference Sessions, and Poster Interactions

> Across the two main conference days, a mix of talks, poster sessions, and networking opportunities enriched our knowledge. Highlights included keynote talks from prominent figures in bioinformatics and genomic sciences, tackling issues in microbiome data integration, large-scale clinical data analysis, and applications in environmental science. We found sessions on data standardization, open-source workflows, and community-driven research especially pertinent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Across the two main conference days, a mix of talks, poster sessions, and networking opportunities enriched our knowledge. Highlights included keynote talks from prominent researchers and experts in bioinformatics and genomic sciences, tackling issues in microbiome data integration, large-scale clinical data analysis, and applications in environmental science. We found sessions on data standardization, open-source workflows, and community-driven research especially pertinent.
```

The poster sessions, featuring 158 posters, were a lively exchange of ideas. Presenting our work and discussing it with colleagues across bioinformatics sparked new perspectives on data standards, reproducibility, and community collaboration.

### Galaxy Team Poster Presentations

Our Galaxy team contributed two posters, both well-received and served as excellent opportunities for discussion:

- **microGalaxy SIG: Microbial Data Analysis Resources in Galaxy**  
   This poster highlighted Galaxy's resources for microbial data analysis, outlining workflows and tools designed for complex microbial data sets. We connected with microbiome researchers, discussing ways Galaxy can continue to support and adapt to microbial data needs.

- **Community-Driven Standards Development for Reference Genome Generation**  

>    This poster addressed the collaborative efforts in Galaxy to standardize reference genome generation, with community input playing a key role in refining workflows. The feedback underscored the importance of ongoing community involvement in creating adaptable, high-standard open-source tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This poster addressed the collaborative efforts of Galaxy EU and [ERGA](https://www.erga-biodiversity.eu/) community to establish community-driven standards for reference genome generation. The feedback underscored the importance of ongoing community involvement in developing adaptable, high-standard open-source tools and workflows.
```

![Poster 1: microGalaxy SIG](gcb2024poster_microgalaxy.jpg)  

> ![Poster 2: Community-Driven Standards](gcb2024poster_referencegenome.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Poster 2: Community-Driven Standards of Reference Genome Generation](gcb2024poster_referencegenome.png)
```

### Social Program: Networking and Cultural Highlights

> Beyond the enriching scientific exchange, GCB 2024’s social program added a unique flavor to the event. We attended a networking dinner at the [Zwinger Palace](https://gcb2024.de/Social+Programme.html), complete with guided tours of this historical gem, followed by a delightful dinner reception. Conversations flowed easily, sparking ideas for future collaborations within the bioinformatics community. These informal exchanges gave us the chance to connect with peers, gain insights into their work, and share our own experiences working within the Galaxy ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Beyond the enriching scientific exchange, GCB 2024’s social program added a unique flavor to the event. We attended a networking dinner at the [GLÜCKUNDSELIGKEIT restaurant](https://gcb2024.de/Social+Programme.html), complete with guided tours of the Bielefeld city, followed by a delightful dinner reception. Conversations flowed easily, sparking ideas for future collaborations within the bioinformatics community. These informal exchanges gave us the chance to connect with peers, gain insights into their work, and share our own experiences working within the Galaxy ecosystem.
```
